Which matrix should I use?



The general consensus is that matrices derived from observed
substitution data (e.g. the Dayhoff or BLOSUM matrices) are superior
to identity, genetic code or physical property matrices (e.g. see
[3]). However, there are Dayhoff matrices of different PAM values and
BLOSUM matrices of different percentage identity and which of these
should be used?

Schwartz and Dayhoff [2] recommended a mutation data matrix for the
distance of 250 PAMs as a result of a study using a dynamic
programming procedure [13] to compare a variety of proteins known to
be distantly related. The 250 PAM matrix was selected since in Monte
Carlo studies (see Section 4.1) matrices reflecting this evolutionary
distance gave a consistently higher significance score than other
matrices in the range 0-750 PAM. The matrix also gave better scores
when compared to McLachlan's substitution matrix [6], the genetic code
matrix and identity scoring. Recently, Altschul [14] has examined
Dayhoff style mutation data matrices from an information theoretical
perspective. For alignments that do not include gaps he concluded, in
broad agreement with Schwarz and Dayhoff, that a matrix of 200 PAMS
was most appropriate when the sequences to be compared were thought to
be related. However, when comparing sequences that were not known in
advance to be related, for example when database scanning, a 120 PAM
matrix was the best compromise. When using a local alignment method
(Section 6.7) Altschul suggests that three matrices should ideally be
used: PAM40, PAM120 and PAM250, the lower PAM matrices will tend to
find short alignments of highly similar sequences, while higher PAM
matrices will find longer, weaker local alignments. Similar
conclusions were reached by Collins and Coulson [15] who advocate
using a compromise PAM100 matrix, but also suggest the use of multiple
PAM matrices to allow detection of local similarities of all types.

Henikoff and Henikoff [16] have compared the BLOSUM matrices to PAM,
PET, Overington, Gonnet [17] and multiple PAM matrices by evaluating
how effectively the matrices can detect known members of a protein
family from a database when searching with the ungapped local
alignment program BLAST [18]. They conclude that overall the BLOSUM 62
matrix is the most effective. However, all the substitution matrices
investigated perform better than BLOSUM 62 for a proportion of the
families. This suggests that no single matrix is the complete answer
for all sequence comparisons. It is probably best to compliment the
BLOSUM 62 matrix with comparisons using PET91 at 250 PAMS, and
Overington structurally derived matrices. It seems likely that as more
protein three dimensional structures are determined, substitution
tables derived from structure comparison will give the most reliable
data.

